
Section 1 - Using Shark Command Line Tools
Section 1.1 - Compiling And Linking
Section 1.2 - One-Step Building
Section 2 - Gameshark Howto
Section 3 - Python Howto
Section 4 - JavaScript Howto
Section 5 - Lua Howto
Section 6 - Ren'Py Howto
Section 7 - Next Steps

Shark is NOT an scripting language, this means there's no such thing as a shark --run command that executes a file from source. It must be compiled and linked before that.

Section 1 - Using Shark Command Line Tools

The first step for using shark is downloading a copy of it's binary distribution and unzipping it to your directory of preference (the preferred location for the shark SDK on windows is C:\shark\).

The second step is optional, configure your PATH variable to allow the command line find the shark toolchain. Make sure it points to the root directory of the unzipped shark distribution.

Now to open a command prompt, type 'shark' and hit enter, you should see something like:
Usage: C:\shark\bin\shark.exe <filename> <args>

Section 1.1 - Compiling And Linking

Let's say you want to compile a file called hello.shk (stored elsewhere on the filesystem). First cd to the directory containing the file then type the following:
> shark tool compile c hello.shk hello.obj
The first three words 'shark tool compile' are used to call the shark compiler. The next, 'c' tells the compiler to generate C bytecode. The next is the path to the source code you want to compile and the last is the path where the object code will be stored.
This command should generate an object file called 'hello.obj'.

To link your newly created object file into a shark executable type the following:
> shark tool link c hello.obj hello hello.shar
The first three words 'shark tool link' calls the shark linker. The next, 'c' tells the linker that we're generating a C bytecode executable. The next is the path to the object file to be linked 'hello.obj'. Next is the name of the module that will be run on program start and that contains the 'main' function 'hello' and last is the name of the output shark executable 'hello.shar'. The '.shar' file extension means "SHark ARchive" and is used by shark C bytecode executables and library files.

If you followed all the steps just type 'shark hello.shar' to execute the produced shark executable.

Try tipying 'shark tool compile' and 'shark tool link' without arguments to see a help message and learn how to use those tools further.

Section 1.2 - One-Step Building

A shortcut to generate a shark archive directly from a shark source file is 'shark tool build'. You could have typed the following to create the final executable:
> shark tool build hello.shk hello.shar

This is munch shortest and easier to use, but is only available for the C bytecode target.

Also try tipying 'shark tool build' without arguments to learn more about this tool.

Section 2 - Gameshark Howto

To compile and run a gameshark project cd to the project's root directory and type the following commands:
> shark tool build src/main.shk bin/game.shar
> gameshark ./
The first command builds the game binary and the second executes it.

Section 3 - Python Howto

To start cross compiling to python change the 'c' argument of the compiler to 'py'. For instance to compile our 'hello.shk' to python do:
> shark tool compile py hello.shk out.py

Now the result must be linked against the shark runtime (sharkrt.py located in the /rt directory of the shark SDK) to run properly. There are two ways to do this.
You can link the result dynamically against sharkrt.py by tipying:
> shark tool link py out.py hello hello.py
The resulting python file depends on 'sharkrt.py' to run so make sure the file is available to python in some way.
Second, you can link statically, which will embed the shark runtime into the final executable and make it dependency free. For this use the 'pyo' target of the linker:
> shark tool link pyo out.py hello hello.py

Whatever method you choose run the generated 'hello.py' with:
> python hello.py

When compiling to python you can directly import any python library from shark using the 'import' declaration, like if it where a regular shark module.

But this may not be enought for writting portable code. If you want to use the shark standard library from python you must compile it from source and link it against your python executable.

To compile the shark standard library from source cd to the shark SDK root directory and type the following command:
> shark tool compile py lib/libpythonsystem/system.shk out/system.py

To link your program against the system library copy the generated out/system.py to the desired location then run the following:
> shark tool link py my-python-object.py main my-python-program.py system.py

To run a GS based game in python you will need to install the pygame library, compile the pygameshark library from source and link it 'correctly' against your game code.

First install pygame:
> pip install pygame

Next cd to the shark SDK root directory and type...
> shark tool compile py lib/libpythonsystem/system.shk out/system.py
...to build the system library and...
> shark tool compile py lib/libpygameshark/shark.shk out/shark.py
...to build the gameshark library.

Now cd to your game's root directory and type:
> shark tool compile py src/main.shk bin/out.py
Now link the created libraries to your game code passing 'shark' (and not 'main') as the main module, like this:
> shark tool link pyo bin/out.py shark bin/game.py path/to/system.py path/to/shark.py

Section 4 - JavaScript Howto

To start cross compiling to javascript change the 'c' argument of the compiler to 'js'. For instance to compile our 'hello.shk' to javascript do:
> shark tool compile js hello.shk out.js

Now the result must be linked against the shark runtime (sharkrt.js located in the /rt directory of the shark SDK) to run properly. There are two ways to do this.
If you're creating a web page you can use a script tag to make the required 'sharkrt.js' available to your program. This requires no linking.
Otherwise you can link to it statically, which will embed the shark runtime into the final executable. For this use the 'js' target of the linker:
> shark tool link js out.js hello hello.js

When compiling to javascript you can make any global javascript variable visible from shark by declaring it in your source file as an empty variable. For instance, to access the browser's console object you can write:
var console
console::log("Hi.")

To run a GS based game in HTML5 you will need to compile the htmlgameshark library from source and link it 'correctly' against your game code.

First cd to the shark SDK root directory and type the following to build the gameshark library:
> shark tool compile js lib/libhtmlgameshark/shark.shk out/shark.js

Now cd to your game's root directory and type:
> shark tool compile js src/main.shk bin/out.js
Now link the created library to your game code passing 'shark' (and not 'main') as the main module and naming the result 'game.js', like this:
> shark tool link js bin/out.js shark bin/game.js path/to/shark.js

Last, copy the file 'template/index.html' from the shark SDK directory into your game's root directory. Launch the result in a browser to test it.

Section 5 - Lua Howto

To start cross compiling to lua change the 'c' argument of the compiler to 'lua'. For instance to compile our 'hello.shk' to lua do:
> shark tool compile lua hello.shk out.lua

Now the result must be linked against the shark runtime (sharkrt.lua located in the /rt directory of the shark SDK) to run properly. There are two ways to do this.
You can link the result dynamically against sharkrt.lua by tipying:
> shark tool link lua out.lua hello hello.lua
The resulting lua file depends on 'sharkrt.lua' to run so make sure the file is available to lua in some way.
Second, you can link statically, which will embed the shark runtime into the final executable and make it dependency free. For this use the 'luao' target of the linker:
> shark tool link luao out.lua hello hello.lua

Whatever method you choose run the generated 'hello.lua' with:
> lua hello.lua

When compiling to lua you can directly import any lua library from shark using the 'import' declaration, like if it where a regular shark module. You can also make any global lua variable visible from shark by declaring it in your source file as an empty variable. For instance, to access lua's print function you can write:
var print
print("Hi.")

But this may not be enought for writting portable code. If you want to use the shark standard library from lua you must compile it from source and link it against your lua executable.

To compile the shark standard library from source cd to the shark SDK root directory and type the following command:
> shark tool compile lua lib/libluasystem/system.shk out/system.lua

To link your program against the system library copy the generated out/system.lua to the desired location then run the following:
> shark tool link lua my-python-object.lua main my-python-program.lua system.lua

Section 6 - Ren'Py Howto

To port a GS game to Ren'Py start by launching renpy and creating a new empty project, then replace the generated 'game/script.rpy' with the file 'template/script.rpy' found in the shark SDK directory.

Next compile the shark system library and the 'renpygameshark' library using the 'rpy' target of the compiler:
> shark tool compile rpy lib/libpythonsystem/system.shk out/system.rpy
> shark tool compile rpy lib/librenpygameshark/shark.shk out/shark.rpy
Copy those files to your game's directory and you've got a basic renpy environment to run your game code.

Now, to compile your game to renpy source code cd to your game's root directory and type:
> shark tool compile rpy src/main.shk bin/game.rpy

Now copy the generated bin/game.rpy along with your game's /asset folder to your renpy game's directoy, and that's it. Launch your game to test it.

Section 7 - Next Steps

Now you know basically everything needed to make full use of shark. But the road doesn't ends here.

If you like shark consider contrubuting to it. Further improvements and development is in hands of the community and is going to be regulated by the SCP (Shark Community Process). To ask a question, report bugs, share your ideas and hacks, or propose new improvements for the shark language visit sharkhosted.proboards.com, the home of shark development and discussion.

If you have a question or comment about shark that is of particular interest for me, we can get in touch at shogundevel@gmail.com.

Happy coding :>
